We're in Clemson, South Carolina, sitting on the
back porch that's now been glassed in of the home
where Dr. and Mrs. Williams lived for a number of
years while they were here on the faculty at
Clemson. Mrs. Williams, would you please sum up?
Margaret, would you please summarize for us
briefly a sketch of where you all served before
coming to College Station? Well, we had this back
porch. from 1961 until 1966 before we moved to
Austin, Texas. We thank this Commissioner of
Higher Education. Here at Clemson... We lived in
this house, but we came in the 40s. And he came as a
faculty member. As an instructor. And he left as
the academic vice president. And it had been
delightful years of college. We raised our
children here. And... lifelong friends.
Well, you won't be testing now, so you don't want to
push the recording. Tom, only two years when he was
commissioner, and he worked in all the states and
colleges in Texas. He worked with them all. Did the
best he could with writing a program. He wrote a
program for a plan, and when he finished the plan,
he thought it was time to go. And at that time, he had
some other offers, and one of them was
Can you summarize for us how A&M and the Williamses
came together? Who came to visit, and how, and why,
as far as you know? The link with A&M. The board came
to visit with you all. Oh, yeah. That was Ford
Albritton,
Mr. Chairman. Clyde Wells. That's the three I
remember. There may have been others. You'd have
to check into that. How long did they visit? They
came in on Sunday and stayed through Monday as far
as I know. All I can remember is I got them a room at
the motel.
uh couldn't you know plan for the country club
because it was a monday i remember it was a monday so
they had to eat at the hotel i wasn't going to feed
them you know i hope you haven't left at all were
there any uh were there any previous discussions
between texas a m and y'all before that time had uh
mr rutter and mr rudder had contacted jack before
he died And since I wasn't privy to hearing that
conversation, I know that he had said he would
consider it. And then we got word that he had done
it. And then he got word that these people wanted to
come to see him. And he told me to make the
arrangements. All right. Y'all came, I believe,
November 1, 1970. He did. About how long ahead of
time did this group come to visit y'all in
Knoxville? I might even find a letter if I went
through the file that he had written back saying
that he believed in coordination, that the med
school and the law school would have to work into a
plan like that. I remember his saying to me that he
also asked them to give him their backing to
designate a dormitory for women beginning in 1971
so that there would be a place for women to live on
campus. Well, I knew that that happened. They even
put in hair dryers. But that wasn't the first thing
that was requested of him when he got there. What
was the first thing? Well, the first thing was, we
want you to fire the coach.
And his answer was, no, you give them a year's
notice. And the second was a request from the
students who wanted girls in their dormitories,
in their rooms, and his answer was, I have two
daughters, you all are fine young men, I would like
for my daughters to get to know you all, but not in
your dormitory where there's no place to sit
except on the bed. And that worked. Do you want
that? Obviously he didn't. What similarity was
there between Clemson, where you all had had a long
experience, and Texas A&M. How were the schools
similar? Lynn Grant. That's as far as I know, and
both of them after World War II going co-ed. Did
they have much school spirit? Yes. Were there many
traditions? Not like Texas A&M, I don't believe. I
don't believe the traditions here. This was a
period when I was teaching school and raising two
daughters, so you can see that I did my beauties
with Jack's work, but you know, I wasn't. It was
after World War II when things were growing and the
faculty was new. I imagine they were very much
alike, don't you? Oh, very, very. Like I tell
people, they were both off the main highway a long
distance from the state capitol where the other
state university is, and that I assume that
Gamecocks tell Clemson jokes the way Longhorns
tell Aggie jokes. All the Aggie jokes go all over
the United States because of the Aggie schools.
Sure. The Morrill, Morrill, is that the name?
Morrill Act. Act. And so they all were put out in the
country because it was an Aggie school. Yeah.
Among the key people that I know Dr. Williams
worked with was John Calhoun. Yes, he was a gift
from heaven.
He couldn't have been more fortunate to have John
Calhoun there. They had known each other
previously. Jack had looked him up. Do you
remember the speech? In the speech he told about
Jack looking up because of his name. And then they
knew each other when Jack was commissioner. And he
had him that entire time as a loyal, talented...
Turn it off and I'll tell you what I said about him.
Don't say anything you don't want on here. We'll do
that later. Say only the things you want recorded.
Have you got it on? Yeah, it's on. Okay. John was a
brilliant man. And his wife was lovely and very
supportive of him. And I don't think that Jack
could have been more fortunate than to have had
John. And with the two of them, they put an academic
team together that compared to none anyplace. And
it wasn't one that they were known for the
smallness of their team and how it all worked
together. And I don't remember any conflicts. I
don't either. I don't either. I don't remember
anybody having any great uproar over anything.
And the same thing happened with his staff in the
office. Nelda Rowell. Nelda Rowell was, you just
can't estimate how much she meant to Jack because
she was willing to be an assistant and she knew what
assisting somebody meant. It meant be honest with
them and help them in any way you can. And she was as
loyal as anybody I've ever known. If she ever saw a
letter or an item that she thought might need a
little more time or a little more review, what was
her technique? Her technique was saying, Dr.
Williams, I don't believe I would mail this today.
What was his route? Let's make believe it's a
typical Monday through Friday, and I know no day
was typical. What was his average routine for the
day? He got up about what time and did what in what
sequence?
Well, we had a pattern. We didn't have any servants
in the house for breakfast.
I cooked his breakfast, and I put a card table up in
the kitchen under a light because the lighting in
the family dining room, he couldn't read the paper
by the chandelier. And so I put a card table up over
one of the lights in front of one of the ovens in the
kitchen. And I sat on the stool at the counter and
ate my breakfast. And he sat at the card table and
read the paper and ate. And we had that time
together. And did he sometimes read news items to
you from the paper? No, no. But we had that meal
together. And if If he came home for lunch, we put
our food on the tray and took it back to the office so
it would be private. What time did he get up and do
mail early in the mornings? He finished up
everything at night. He wouldn't have gone to bed
with something that wasn't dictated. And the
office staff told Barry that he'd bring them in all
these tapes and they'd type them up and then he'd
hand them another set. But they never got caught
up. But he had a happy staff as far as I can tell. It
ran smoothly, and he didn't have anything
unpleasant except one person that he didn't think
was loyal. He didn't put that in there. Let's see.
Melda, John Calhoun. Haskell Monroe. Haskell was
the one, if you want to know anything, ask Haskell,
because he has lunch every day with a different
faculty member. And he knows everything that's
going on. If you want some information, go to
Haskell. You had a good way, Haskell had a great way
of knowing what was going on on the campus. Thank
you. Thank you. Dick Winerdi. Dick is a
fascinating man. He has a lot of energy and
enthusiasm and talent. He was recently, a year or
two ago, he was the man of the year for Houston,
Texas. And he is the person who should have the job
as president, as far as I'm concerned, right now as
president of the Texas Medical Center because of
his many talents and his engineering expertise.
When you all got to A&M, do you think Dr. Williams
had any specific goals in mind for A&M? things he
wanted to work on? He had so much experience with
the Southern Association that he would have
known, he was always a member on the commission of
the Southern Association, and he would have known
what all the universities needed to be because
he'd been doing accreditations for all the
universities, so he knew. Did he dream of a medical
school, you think, when you all got there? Was
that...
visiting board members who came to interview him
in Knoxville said they would like to have one. And
his answer was, if it can come, as it should,
through coordination, if the time can come. But I
do believe in coordination, and we can all have
everything we want. Describe, as far as you
recall, how the A&M Press came to be. Who was it that
got Wardlaw and Williams together? John Lindsay.
Telephone call from John Lindsay. And he tells one
story slightly different from mine because I
wasn't in that conversation. I just know that Jack
said that bring him in and that he was interested
when John called. And when he did come to our house,
he looked at the coffee table and he says, there's
my book. And I have a book That was his first success
book when he was editor of South Carolina
University Press. And I've heard him tell the
story of how they worked him into doing this. And it
doesn't have his name in it. I had no idea that it was
his book. And he thought I had put it out just for
him. But the first thing he saw, and the name of it,
he said he went to bed one night. He's going to bed,
and he didn't have a name for his book. And he was
going to press, and all at once he remembered a line
from a poem by the state poet. Thank him who placed
us here beneath so kind a sky. So he entitled his
book Beneath So Kind a Sky. And it's a picture,
historical
picture and story of the old historic places in
South Carolina. Let's see. I know that y'all were
close friends of Buck Shewitz. Well, that was one
of the nicest things that's ever happened to me was
to know Buck Shewitz because he was one of the most
interesting people I've ever known. You know, he
was lovable. And Texas A&M, of course, he deserved
them and they deserved him. Is that okay to say?
Those two fit together. They do. They do. He was
just a delightful character and a talent. Even
with the sad things that happened to him. Now, he
did a drawing or an engraving or whatever the
proper artistic term would be of the president's
house at College Station. A Christmas card. I had
requested that he do a scene on the campus of
students. Instead of that, he sat in a car for three
days. Well, I wasn't in town then, and did this
picture of the president's home. And when I saw it,
I said, I'd like to buy it. And he said, you can't
afford it. Then he gave it to me for a Christmas
present. And when I left Texas A&M, I turned it to
the university, and it's in their collection.
Let's see, describe the campus as you recall it
when you all first arrived. What were the
important structures that were there? Well, the
Rudder Tower was new. I remember the first evening
with Van Claverin for our first opening of the,
what was it? The Rudder Auditorium. The Rudder
Auditorium. That was, to me, a very exciting
evening.
I remember Harold Dunn and Mr. I'm trying
to think of the other name of the building. Kruger?
Kruger. When they named that, both were pleased to
have their name on that. I was the MC that night. I
remember that. Polly and Mr. Dunn, well, that was
nice. And both of them were just delightful people
to know. And I'm glad that... that I knew so many of
the people who had their name on the buildings. Mr.
Pat Zachary, Mr. J. Harold Dunn. This means a lot to
me to have known them and know that they were worthy
of
being honored in such a way. Mr. Evans. Describe
Mr. Evans in personality.
Shy. Hesitant, outgoing, good humor, what? I
didn't know him that well. Oh, okay. I just saw him
on occasions in the day of that dedication. He was
in, I'm trying to think the name of his plantation.
We got correspondence from him very often. Little
Eva Plantation. He sold that a little while later.
But I remember that. been heading on his
stationery for that, and then I pushed her
wheelchair the day of the dedication. And that the
Friends of the Library organization was an
outgrowth of the new library with his name. Do you
know, does your trivia information recall why it
was the Little Eva Plantation? I don't think I ever
knew. That character from Uncle Tom's Cabin, is
buried there little eva and for a while he
transferred the title of that to a m and i was the one
to try to worry about it and i was worried that some
villain was going to get in there and destroy and
thank goodness he came a few months later and said
if you'll give it back i'll give you land in texas
worth a heck of a lot more and so we very gladly made
that exchange this man john lindsay you mentioned
him Describe John Lindsay and your feelings about
him. He and his wife are lovely people, of course.
And it was obvious that he was interested in the
university. And I think it's well known that he's
responsible for the press. He had Frank Wardlow at
his home. And he asked him would he be willing to
start a press for Texas A&M. far as I understood he
said he would. And so he called Jack and Jack said
bring him in. That's the words I heard. Now I heard
him make a speech and tell a funny story about their
meeting over in Austin. Tell the funny story. Well
the funny story was that Frank didn't want to be
seen with the president of Texas A&M so they picked
a small motel someplace that they weren't too
happy to be They're meeting him, but they still,
that way, Frank wouldn't be in any trouble for
having a meeting and giving somebody the idea that
something was going on. As far... I know why he
wanted to leave. It was a period, and you don't have
to erase this. It was a period when he was getting
transferred to report from different people,
wasn't it? That wasn't the story I heard. The story
I heard, and we had the press right there. Back to
this man Lindsey. What areas of A&M do you think
John Lindsey was interested in? All of it as far as
I'm concerned. He just was interested in A&M and
wanted to help. And I was close to the press story,
but he was just always there with an idea and
supporting it in every way. But there were so many.
Aggies that really love their university and are
willing to do anything for them. But John stands
out. He stands out and he's still there. He's still
there trying to help. And Sarah was a good,
interested person. She was supportive of him. And
I don't know why he had any greater love or that he
had any greater love for this university than a lot
of the other performance students. But he never
stopped. Trying to help. Buck Wirus. Well, I just
love to hear him. He's such a good buddy. And he was
good for Jack, and he traveled with Jack. And once
he told me, you can right turn it on. Tell us about
Wirus taking him to a high school to speak to some
parents. Well, Buck told me that he told Jack, he
said, I don't know what you can talk about having a
barbecue in a high school gymnasium with people
and their children are there. This is a family
affair. And I don't know what you can talk about.
And he said Jack got up and talked about the lessons
of history. And he said he had complete attention
from everybody. He just never seen anything like
him getting up and giving them a history lesson.
When I would hear Dr. Williams make speeches, I was
always deeply impressed with his reference file
in his brain of having an appropriate anecdote or
story or illustration for that particular event.
Did he have a file that he went through? Did he have
them in a book? Where did he get all of those
recollections?
They were all stored away in his brain. They were
there. He was, when he died, he had given a book to
the President of the Medical Center Board, and on
somebody the great, what's his name, the great?
Frederick the Great? Frederick the Great, I guess
it was. And he came in and he looked, and see where
Jack was in his book. And he said, I've read more
than he and Jack haven't finished it. But I didn't
say, Jack's reading three books at a time. Jack
never moved a book. He had a book where he would sit
down or lie down. And he read the book that was close
to it. And so Peter the Great is the name of it. Oh,
OK. See how it probably takes me to get a name to fly
up? What was Dr. Williams' relaxation? What did he
do to ease off?
He liked music. Okay. After his heart attack, even
all the old movies would be on. He read books. Any
particular variety of music? Well, he liked
classical music, and you ought to see his music
collection back here. You ought to see the
collection where he's got a tape that he... He did
everything the Reader's Digest at the university
ever had and recorded it all. I even have
recordings of him singing with the music and
drumming with two pencils, the erasers of two
pencils. He entertained himself by recording
himself and singing. He was a drummer now, a drum
major for the high school band, the drum and bugle
corps. I have tapes where he just recorded himself
doing that. He was the Drum and Bugle Corps drum
major in Galax? Uh-huh, for the Drum and Bugle
Corps. And the summer he went to college, before he
went to college at 16, he went to Denver, Colorado
for six weeks to train their Drum and Bugle Corps.
Now he grew up in Galax? During that time he was
there. His father changed him from BPI, where he
had a football scholarship, Emory & Henry College
and told him when he came through, Emory and
Virginia would get off the train and his trunk
would be there. He said, you've already broken
your wrist and chipped your tooth and I don't want
you playing football. So he changed him while he
was away without consulting him. Why Emory and
Henry? Do we know why Emory and Henry? Somebody
came to see him and recruited him. And did he start
out with a history major? No, he was pre-law. He was
going to be a corporate lawyer. And this is an
interesting story. He played tennis with the
older men in town. He was a lawyer's partner in
tennis. And he wanted to join his law firm, and so he
was going to go into corporate law. And when he came
back from World War II, he graduated and joined the
Marine Corps December the 8th. It took them almost
two years before they could place him in an altar
transfer. So in the meantime, he started
teaching, and they transferred him to a high
school where he was a principal. And he had so many
problems with the students up there in the
mountain area that at one time he went into town and
swore out a warrant for them and had them arrested
and taken to the courthouse. And their parents,
they were throwing snowballs with rocks at them.
And he came back from World War II and said, I'm
going into education. Men are needed in high
schools. Men are needed for discipline. He went to
Emory University and started in on education. And
his professor said, you're wasting your time. If
you will come and major in history, we will give you
a scholarship. He didn't apply for it. And that,
people change in your whole life. But Jack was an
avid reader, always. He was methodical in
everything he did. He kept good records. He threw
everything away. He didn't clutter his life. How
did he come to be a major in Southern history?
Probably was a professor or something like that.
It was social history. When Duke University
interviewed him, they would have hired him if he
had agreed to be a professor.
take a tenure period and be a specialist in that
period. And he said, no, I'm social history. How
did he and Dr. Wiley? He was one of his professors.
And they were good friends. They liked each other.
And in one of the classes, he gave his students a
copy of Billy Yank or Johnny Redwood. Johnny
Redwood would have been first. And Jack, I
remember him sitting there with that marking. He
didn't know the slang for the military. This is one
of the things that he had bad slang and things like
that in it for the men. And so he corrected him. And
he was the only one in the class that did. So that was
it. Now, when did you and that young man meet?
He went
to college at 16. I went to college at 18. I'd been in
West Virginia where they had another extra year in
junior high. And he'd been in Virginia where they
had one less year. So he was two years ahead because
I'd had an extra year and he'd had one less than the
normal folks. And I was there about, as a freshman,
And that would have been in 38. I'm 18. I was born in
20. Is that coming out all right? Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
I've been there about a month. At? At what school?
Henry Henry College. Okay. My daddy wanted me to go
to a girls' school, and I told him I wanted to go to
Henry Henry. And my brother is in the same
fraternity, and he asked him to bring some skirts
that I had left home to be in rehab. And he asked
me... where I was, you know, ask somebody to tell
him that he'd put them behind a standing mirror.
And when I walked into dinner, we ate at different
tables in the dining hall, and I walked in, he said,
who is that? And he told me three or four times
before the meal was over where they were. He
started sending me flowers from his table every
meal of them. He'd take a flower out of the vase and
send it to me. And that was my freshman year, the
first month or six weeks. But he broke the first
date we had for a football game. He didn't have the
courage to tell me that he was supposed to go to a
dance at Virginia Univ. And he kept saying, well,
you go to the first football. You turned that off, I
hope. No, no, no. We want this. This is good. Oh, my.
No, this is good. There's nothing bad about this.
I'll show you how smart I was. You're a freshman,
and he's a junior? And
he kept saying, will you go to the first football
game with me? And I said, yeah. And one day we were
walking along, and the date came up, but when is the
first football game? And it was a dead silence.
Well, I already knew that he went to Virginia
Intermont Dance, which is a girls' school in
Bristol. And then he had a stag line because he was
the only one that knew a certain dance, the shag.
And so the girls lined up to dance with him. And this
dance was the day of the, the next dance was the day
of the football game, and of course he already had a
date for it. But he didn't open his mouth. He didn't
tell me he was going to break the date. He just
didn't show up. But I knew when there was a dead
silence that he wasn't going. So I went up and told
all my friends that Jack was going to break a date
with me. This was early in the year, first football
game. So we went to it, and it never was brought up
again. He acted like that evening never existed,
and I did too. It was never mentioned. He never went
to another dance at the Virginia In-N-Out. He
started dating a preacher's daughter who hadn't
really learned to dance and no, did really learn.
But what I'm saying is he just kept quiet. That was a
characteristic.